[DOCS] Add docs for Using Clad section (#406)
vgvassilev/clad: docs/userDocs/source/user/UsingClad.rst

Automatic Differentiation
===========================

Clad differentiation functions takes a function as an input and returns a 
`clad::CladFunction` object that contains information about the generated 
derived function. Generated derived function can be called by calling the 
`.execute` method on the corresponding `clad::CladFunction` object.

> Clad provides 4 main automatic differentiation functions.

Reviewer: to me the original version reads better. "Main" perhaps could be "primary"? but otherwise, "provides" really means the clad API consists of?

> Clad provides 4 main automatic differentiation functions.

Author: Yes, 'provides' here meant 'consists of'. What should I change this sentence to:
1) Clad consists of several functions
Or
2) Clad consists of 4 primary automatic differentiation functions:

- `clad::differentiate` -- Primary forward mode automatic differentiation
- `clad::gradient` -- Primary reverse mode automatic differentiation
- `clad::hessian`
- `clad::jacobian`

Each of these functions will be explored in this guide.

.. todo::

   Perhaps add example use before proceeding with different differentiation modes.

Forward Mode Automatic Differentiation
----------------------------------------

Forward mode AD , also known as forward accumulation AD, allows to compute 

> derivative of all the output variables with respect to a single input variable 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
derivative of all output variables with respect to a single input variable 
```

> (independent variable) in a single pass of the generated derived function.

Reviewer: not obvious what "independent variable" means?

Reviewer: and "single pass through the derived function"? - but where is "derived function" introduced?

Author: I have modified this subsection to address the suggestions.

> Mathematically, the forward mode AD allows us to efficiently compute columns of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mathematically, forward mode AD allows the efficient computation of columns of 
```

the jacobian matrix.

`clad::differentiate` provides the forward mode differentiation functionality. 

> `clad::differentiate` function takes as input a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It takes as input a 
```

> source function and an independent parameter that can be specified either 

Reviewer: so here I think independent parameter means argument with respect to which the function output(s) should be differentiated. Probably better just to say that

as the parameter index or the parameter name. It returns a `clad::CladFunction`
object containing the information about the generated derived function. 
Generated derived function can be executed by calling the `.execute` member 
function.

> A self-explanatory example that demonstrates the usage of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An example that demonstrates the usage of 
```

> ``clad::differentiate``::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``clad::differentiate`` is:
```

Author: Should I add 'is' at the end of each such sentence? 
"""
An example that demonstrates the usage of ``clad::differentiate`` is:
"""

Should we use this instead?

""""
An example that demonstrates the usage of ``clad::differentiate`` is as follows:
""""

Reviewer: personally, I find just "is" to be sufficient

Author: Okay, I will use just "is" then.

   #include <iostream>
   #include "clad/Differentiator/Differentiator.h"

   double fn(double x, double y) {
     return x*x + y*y;
   }

   int main() {
     // differentiate 'fn' w.r.t 'x'.
     auto d_fn_1 = clad::differentiate(fn, "x");
  
     // computes derivative of 'fn' w.r.t 'x' when (x, y) = (3, 4).
     std::cout<<d_fn_1.execute(3, 4)<<"\n"; // prints 6
   }

> Independent parameter can be specified either using the parameter name or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Independent parameter can be specified either using the parameter name or
```

but see earlier comments about this

Author: I have now explained above what is meant by an independent parameter.

> the parameter index. Indexing of the parameters starts from 0. Therefore for 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the parameter index. Parameter indexing starts from 0. Therefore for 
```

> the example shown above, 2 differentiation calls shown below are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the example shown above, the two differentiation calls shown below are equivalent
```

> equivalent::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
equivalent:
```

Author: Here `::` is a syntax of restructuredText. It ends the current statement by a single colon and then immediately starts a code block.

  clad::differentiate(fn, "x");

> and:: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and:
```

change all the :: to :

Author: `::` is a syntax of restructuredText. It ends the current statement by a single colon and then immediately starts a code block.

  
  clad::differentiate(fn, 0);

> We can execute the derived function by calling the `.execute` method. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The derived function is executed by calling the `.execute` method. 
```

> Clad forward mode differentiated functions returns the computed derivatives,

Reviewer: can it really be more than one derivative?

Author: Effectively yes. For example, consider differentiation of the function `fn` with respect to parameter `i`.
```cpp
std::vector<double> fn(double i, double j, std::vector<double> v) { ... }
```

The derivative returned by this function will be of type `std::vector<double>`. Since it's an aggregate type, it will contain many derivatives within it. These derivatives can be accessed as follows:

```cpp
std::vector<double> v;
auto d = d_fn.execute(3, 5, v);
std::cout<<d[0]<<"\n";  // derivative of 0th element of the fn's returned vector value w.r.t 'i'
std::cout<<d[1]<<"\n";  // derivative of 1st element of the fn's returned vector value w.r.t 'i'
...
```

> this behaviour is unique among other types of derived functions generated by Clad.

Reviewer: not obvious what this phrase adds to the text?

Reviewer: I'd suggest dropping it here - if there is a need to explain this in general then I'd suggest adding a separate paragraph about general usage of clad.

Author: Okay.

> We can also differentiate with respect to an array element. The following

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clad can also differentiate with respect to an array element. The following
```

> self-explanatory example demonstrates this::

Reviewer: lets avoid "self-explanatory". (the reader that doesn't understand won't be happy:)

  double fn_arr(double* arr, int n) {
    double res = 0;
    for (int i=0; i<n-1; ++i)
      res += arr[i] * arr[i+1];
    return res;
  }

  int main() {
    // Differentiate 'fn_arr' w.r.t element '1' of the 'arr' parameter
    auto d_fn_arr = clad::differentiate(fn_arr, "arr[1]");
    double arr[5] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
    std::cout<<d_fn_arr.execute(arr, 5)<<"\n";  // prints 4
  }

> Arbitrary higher-order derivatives can also be computed using the forward mode 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Arbitrary higher-order derivatives can also be computed using  forward mode 
```

> differentiation. The following examples demonstrates computing higher-order derivatives::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
differentiation. The following examples demonstrate computing higher-order derivatives::
```

Reviewer: how about the computation of higher-order derivatives:

  double fn(double i) { return i * i * i * i; }

  int main() {
    // Differentiate 3rd order higher derivative of 'fn_arr' w.r.t parameter 'i'
    auto d_fn_3 = clad::differentiate<3>(fn, "i");
    std::cout << d_fn_3.execute(3) << "\n"; // prints 72.00
  }

.. note::

   Forward mode AD can only be used to differentiate with respect to a single 
   value. For differentiating with respect to multiple values (parameters), 

>    please use reverse mode AD.

Reviewer: reverse-mode AD must be used.

  
Visit API reference of :ref:`clad::differentiate<api_reference_clad_differentiate>`
for more details.

Reverse Mode Automatic Differentiation
----------------------------------------

Hessian Computation
----------------------

> We can directly compute the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clad can directly compute the 
```

`hessian matrix <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hessian_matrix>`_ of a

> function in Clad using the ``clad::hessian`` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function using the ``clad::hessian`` function.
```

.. figure:: ../_static/hessian-matrix.png
  :width: 400
  :align: center
  :alt: Hessian matrix image taken from wikipedia
  
  Hessian matrix when specified parameters are 
  (x\ :sub:`1`\ , x\ :sub:`2`\ , ..., x\ :sub:`n`\ ).

`clad::hessian` provides the hessian computation functionality. 

> `clad::hessian` function takes as input a source function, whose hessian have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `clad::hessian` function takes a source function as input, whose hessian have
```

Reviewer: the phrase after "," seems redundant

Author: I have updated this line to: 
"The `clad::hessian` function takes a source function as input, and optionally, 
information about independent parameters -- with respect to which hessian should be computed."

Is the updated line okay?

to be computed, and optionally, information about independent variables.

Internally, ``clad::hessian`` uses both the forward mode AD and the 
reverse mode AD to efficiently compute hessian matrix.  

A self-explanatory example that demonstrates the usage of ``clad::hessian``::

  #include "clad/Differentiator/Differentiator.h"

  double kinetic_energy(double mass, double velocity) {

>     return mass * velocity * velocity * 0.5;

Reviewer: put the 0.5 first

    auto hessian_two = clad::hessian(kinetic_energy, "mass, velocity");

    // Creates an empty matrix to store the Hessian in
    // Must have enough space, 2 independent variables requires 4 elements (2^2=4)
    double matrix[4];

    // Prints the generated Hessian function
    hessian_one.dump();
    hessian_two.dump();

    // Substitutes these values into the Hessian function and pipes the result
    // into the matrix variable.
    hessian_one.execute(10, 2, matrix);
    hessian_two.execute(5, 1, matrix);
  }

Few important things to note about `clad::hessian`:

- If no independent variable information is provided, then hessian matrix is 
  computed by taking all differentiable function parameters as independent
  variables.

- Independent argument information is provided as a string literal with comma
  separated names of function parameters. For example::

    double product(double i, double j, double k) {
      return i*j*k;
    }
    // computes hessian matrix by taking parameter 'i' and 'j' as independent 
    // variables.
    auto d_fn = clad::hessian(product, "i, j");

- ``clad::hessian`` also supports differentiating w.r.t multiple paramters.

> - Array that will store the computed hessian matrix should be passed as the 

Reviewer: I'd suggest turning this sentence around. its not obvious what array you are talking about until the end of the sentence

Reviewer: ah - but the way to make this obvious to the reader is to start with the code  to call d_fn (which I don't see)

Author: I have added a code segment just above this bullet point and slightly changed the sentence structure such that it is more clear that we are talking about the matrix that will store the computed hessian.

>   last argument to the call to the ``CladFunction::execute``. Array size 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  last argument to the call to the ``CladFunction::execute``. The array size 
```

>   should atleast be as much as the size required to store the hessian matrix. 

Reviewer: at least as big as

>   Passing array size less than the required size will result in undefined behaviour.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Passing an array less than the required size will result in undefined behaviour.
```

.. todo::

   Add details for computing hessian of array ranges.

Jacobian Computation
----------------------

Array Support 
----------------

Differentiating Functors and Lambdas
-------------------------------------

Despite significant differences, differentiating functors and lambda
expressions is remarkably similar to differentiating ordinary functions.

> Similarly, computing hessian matrix and jacobian matrix of functors and

Reviewer: I'd suggest no paragraph break here

Reviewer: there is a "the" missing before computing

lambda expressions is also similar to computing hessian matrix and 
jacobian matrix of ordinary functions.

> Differentiating functors and lambdas means differentiating the call operator 

Reviewer: call operator seems like the wrong name?

Author: Should we use the term 'overloaded function call operator' or perhaps, simply, 'function call operator'?

Reviewer: seems like function call operator is sufficient

Functors and lambda expressions can be passed both by reference and by pointers.
Therefore, the two differentiation calls shown below are equivalent::

  Experiment E;  // a functor
  // passing function by reference
  auto d_E = clad::differentiate(E, "i");

and::

  Experiment E;  // a functor
  // passing function by pointer
  auto d_E = clad::differentiate(&E, "i");

An example that demonstrates differentiation of lambda expressions::

  int main() {
    auto lambda = [](double i, double j) {
      return i*j;
    };
    // Pass by reference
    auto lambda_grad = clad::gradient(lambda);
    // Can be passed by pointer as well!!
    auto lambda_grad_pointer = clad::gradient(&lambda);

    double d_i_1, d_j_1, d_i_2, d_j_2;
    d_i_1 = d_j_1 = d_i_2 = d_j_2 = 0;

    lambda_grad.execute(3, 5, &d_i_1, &d_j_1);
    lambda_grad_pointer.execute(3, 5, &d_i_2, &d_j_2);

    std::cout<<d_i_1<<" "<<d_j_1<<"\n"; // prints 5 3
    std::cout<<d_i_2<<" "<<d_j_2<<"\n"; // prints 5 3
  }

.. note::

   Functor class should not contain multiple overloaded call operators. 
   This restriction will be removed in the future.  

Differentiable Class Types
----------------------------

.. note:: 

>    This feature is currently work in progress. Expect some adventures while

Reviewer: "Experimental" seems to be the typical word for this

but I think you mean "Differentiating Custom Types?

Author: > but I think you mean "Differentiating Custom Types?

Do you mean we should replace the section heading from 'Differentiable Class Types' to 'Differentiating Custom Types'?

   using it. If you do decide to go on this adventure, please consider giving 
   your review as well on how we can improve this functionality.

> One of the main goal of Clad is to be able to differentiate existing codebases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the main goals of Clad is to be able to differentiate existing codebases
```

> with minimal boilerplate code. All existing codebases invariably uses several

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with minimal boilerplate code. Most existing codebases invariably uses several
```

data structures for representing different information at various stages of computations.
Thus, we are adding support for differentiating class type objects for convenient and effective
differentiation of existing codebases. 

> As per the principles of calculus, only functions are differentiable. So, what

Reviewer: hum, not clear what a "function" is

does it mean for a type to be differentiable? It simply means that we can perform
calculus on the values (variables) of this type. In our particular case, we are only 
interested in differentiation. Therefore differentiable types can be used as a parameter
of a differentiable function, as a return type of a differentiable function etc.
Differentiable function is any function that can represent a mathematical function.

.. math::

   F : X \longrightarrow Y

where

.. math::

   X = (x_0, x_1, x_2, ...) \\
   Y = (y_0, y_1, y_2, ...)

For a class type to be differentiable, it should satisfy the following rules:

> - Class should represent a real vector space.

Reviewer: I think you can remove "Class should" from these bullets

- Class should have a default constructor that zero initialises the object of
  the class.
  Class objects initialised by the default constructor should represent
  0 tangent vector -- that is, all real data members should be equal to 0.
- Copy initialisation should perform deep copy initialisation. For example, 
  after performing the initialisation `a(b)`:, 1) there should be no shared 
  resource between `a` and `b`, and 2) values of all the associated data
  members of `a` and `b` should be equal.
- Class should define assignment operator that performs deep copy. 

>   For example, after performing the assignment `a = b;`: 1) there should be no 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For example, after performing the assignment `a = b;`: there should be no 
```

>   shared resource between `a` and `b`, and 2) values of all the associated data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  shared resource between `a` and `b`; and values of all the associated data
```

In case when both `y` and `x` are built-in scalar numerical type, as your 
intuition probably suggests, the derivative type is also a built-in scalar 
numerical type. Things get more complicated when one or both the types
are aggregate types. When used in a computation, aggregate types -- or more generally, 
class types -- represent a mathematical space. In the specific case when either of `y` 
or `x` is a built-in numerical scalar type, the derivative type can be considered
to be the other type. For example, consider the following aggregate type::

  struct Vector {
    double data[5];
  };

If we are differentiating a variable `v` of type `Vector` with respect to a variable `x` of type `double`.
Then, the derivative (tangent vector) type is taken as the `Vector` type. Mathematically, let `Vector` represents
a vector space :math:`V`, then the following relations holds true:

.. math::
  x \in \mathbb{R} \\
  v \in V \\
  \pdv{v}{x} \in V

If :math:`\pdv{v}{x}` is stored in a variable `d_v`. Then we can access the individual 
derivatives as follows::

  d_v.data[0];  // derivative of v.data[0] w.r.t x
  d_v.data[1];  // derivative of v.data[1] w.r.t x
  .. and so on ..

> Similarly, if we are differentiating a variable `y` of type `double` with respect to a variable `v` of type `Vector`.

Reviewer: this is not a sentence.. (Also try to use Clad in place of "we" - its usually shorter and flows better in documentation)

Author: I have modified this sentence so that it is complete.

> Then, in this case as well, the derivative (cotangent) type can be taken as the `Vector` type. 

Reviewer: why introduce cotangent here?

Author: I have removed the cotangent from here.

-------------------------------

At times Clad may be unable to differentiate your function (e.g. if its definition is 
in a library and the source code is not available) or an efficient/more numerically 
stable expression for derivatives may be known that couldn't be computed just by applying 
the rules of automatic differentiation. In such cases, it is useful 
to be able to specify custom derivatives for the function.

Clad supports this functionality by allowing the user to specify their own custom derivatives
pushforward and pullback functions in the namespace ``clad::custom_derivatives::``. 
For a function ``FNAME`` one can specify:

- a custom derivative pushforward function by defining a function
  ``FNAME_pushforward`` inside the namespace ``clad::custom_derivatives::``.
- a custom derivative pullback function by defining a function
  ``FNAME_pullback`` inside the namespace ``clad::custom_derivatives::``.

When Clad will encounter a function ``FNAME``, it will first search for a 
suitable custom derivative function definition within the custom_derivatives namespace. 
Provided no definition was found, Clad will proceed to automatically derive the function.

> Please read :ref:`Pushforward and Pullback Functions` section to get better understanding 

Reviewer: I'd suggest ".... has more details about this topic."

Author: What should we use here between these two: 

1) :ref:`Pushforward and Pullback Functions` has more details about this topic.

2) Please visit :ref:`Pushforward and Pullback Functions` for more details about this topic.

Reviewer: I don't have a preference.

Reviewer 2: @parth-07, is that resolved?
